# Assignment 2 - Linking Loader
Ridhiman Dhindsa, 210101088  
Date: 12 March 2024  

## Files included
**SIC/XE Assembler**  
Inputs: *assembler_input.txt, opcodes.txt, symbols.txt, assembler.cpp*  
Outputs: *assembler_intermediate.txt, assembler_output.txt*  

**Linking Loader**  
Inputs: *assembler_intermediate.txt, assembler_output.txt, opcodes.txt, linking_loader.cpp*  
Outputs: *linking_loader_memory_map.txt, linking_loader_output.txt*

## Steps to run
#### SIC/XE Assembler:
The CPP file `assembler.cpp` takes inputs from `assembler_input.txt`, OPTAB reference from 
`opcodes.txt` and register name references from `symbols.txt`. On running, it creates 2 output files: `assembler_intermediate.txt` and `assembler_output.txt`
1) Open terminal in the directory containing the file `assembler.cpp`  
2) Run the command `g++ assembler.cpp -o assembler`
3) Run the command `./assembler assembler_input.txt`  

#### Linking Loader:
The CPP file takes inputs from `assembler_intermediate.txt`, `assembler_output.txt` and OPTAB reference from `opcodes.txt`. On running, it creates 2 output files: `linking_loader_memory_map.txt` and `linking_loader_output.txt`  
1) Open terminal in the directory containing the file `linking_loader.cpp`  
2) Run the command `g++ linking_loader.cpp -o linking_loader`
3) Run the command `./linking_loader assembler_intermediate.txt assembler_output.txt` 

## Assembler Description
Developed a C++ program to implement a 2 pass assembler for SIC/XE (Simple Instructional Computer/Extended) machine assembly language. The object file includes Header, Text, End, Modification, Define and Refer records. The input consisits of various code sections which are assembled independently.    

Here RESW, RESB, WORD, BYTE are **Assembler Directives**, hence they are not stored in the opcode table (OPTAB). Instead they are dealt with separately.  
Also extended format instructions indicated with '+' sign prepended to the operand, are dealt with using 32-bit addressing.   

In pass 1 of the assembler operation, input consisting of 3 columns is taken, namely- LABEL, OPCODE, OPERAND. This information is used to generate the addresses (LOC) for each line. Also the SYMTAB is prepared in this pass by storing labels and the corresponding addresses they refer to. Program size = (LOCCTR - starting address) is also stored in symtab for each control section separately.  

In pass 2 of the assembler operation, input consisting of 4 columns is taken from the intermediate file, namely- LOC, LABEL, OPCODE, OPERAND. The object codes are generated and stored in object file.  

## Linking Loader Description
The linking loader takes inputs from the object file and intermediate generated by the assembler and links the various external references.

In pass 1 of the linker operation, it assigns addresses to all external references and generates the ESTAB (external symbol table). In this pass PROGADDR is obtained from OS and made equal to CSADDR of 1st control section. CSADDR incremented by CSLTH, subsequently stores the starting address of each control section.

In pass 2, the object code is moved to the actual address and stored in output file. When a modification record is encountered, the symbol is looked up in ESTAB and accordingly modified. The end record of a control section contains the address to be used as the transfer point at the end of the loading operation.